---
layout: post
title: Designing beautiful web applications
tags: 
- User Interfaces
- Design
---

Here are a bunch of guidelines I think are important for creating a great user
experience for your web users. 

Design for audience
-------------------
It is important to put yourself in the users shoes, and design something they 
would want to see. Design for tastes of the target market. Make sure that you
fulfill some of the users' top objectives for visiting your site without too
much scrolling or too much clicking.

Word Density
------------
Everyone seems busy these days. People typically skim over the content and then
read word by word. Make sure that you limit the words the user sees per pixel. 
Where more details are required write a summary before the full text.

Element density
---------------
Users on the Internet are often presented with too much information at the same
time websites are often too noisy. Users prefer clean and simple interfaces. 
Provide quality over quantity. Too much information can easily distract the 
user from figuring out which is the most important thing on a page.

Visual information
------------------
It is hard to read words: use icons, pictures, videos, charts and other visuals
to support the text.

Ease of navigation
------------------
Minimize the number of mouse clicks, scrolls and page refreshes needed to 
access any information or options. For example instead of having a save button
for saving settings, save settings as checkboxes are checked, and as textfields
and dropdowns are changed, except for important actions like changing password
or deleting something. In place text editing is way simpler then having an 
edit button which pops up a box where you have to click save after text input.

Typography
----------
Use fonts that are easy to read. Avoid tiny fonts, while some people love them,
other people have a really hard time reading them. Use Plenty of spacing.
Font face reflects the personality of the website. 

Colors
------
Make sure the colors you use reflect the sites targeted personality. While lots
of colors make the site more playful on the other end of the horizon you can 
just use shades or black and white to create a very elegant website.

Gradients, shadows and 3D effects
---------------------------------
If you are using any of these make sure they have a consistent light source. 
Imagine that the light is coming from top right for instance and create a 
combination of gradients, shadows and 3d effects based on that. Same goes for 
reflection and glossy effects. Human brain quickly recognizes if the light
source defies the laws of physics. So if you try to mimic the real world by
providing gradients, shadows and 3D elements, make sure they look believable.

Positioning
-----------
Positioning/layout should take into account the users psychology. Users 
typically view a webpage in an F shape, that may be true to a certain extent 
for your website.

Shapes
------
Try to use golden ratios where you have rectangles. Try playing around with 
some of your elements and see if they look better as circles and squares.

Conventions
-----------
Try to stick to conventions, but do not be afraid to break them if you find a
more natural way for the user to interact. For example how Apple switched the
scroll directions in the new Macs to make it more intuitive like iPads.

Flow
-----
If it's a web application, there are three different ways of changing displayed
information. Full page refresh, overlay box and div refresh. Full page
refreshes are the most conventional form and are useful to completely change
the context. They should be used for static content pages and when the context
completely changes, eg. perhaps when the user signs in and sees his dashboard.
When in a single visit, a user is expected to change between views several 
times, either an overlay box or div refresh. While overlay boxes are very 
useful for hiding information not needed, over use of overlay boxes can be very
distracting. For instance the new tweet form on Twitter is an overlay box which
hides the input box which is not needed when viewing tweets but it is shown as 
soon as the new tweet button is clicked. If there are too many refreshes it is
a better idea to use div refreshes.